Let's get started setting our development environment
and the easiest way of getting started is to visit the Power BI developer tools page.
You can simply google for Power BI developer tools and you should find this article on
microsoft.com.
Here you are walked through the installation of the developer tools and developer tools
sounds like you can do a lot of things with that,
that's actually not the case. You use these tools to create custom visuals but of course it's a
great coincidence that that is exactly what you plan to do in this lecture.
So here you can see the requirements and how you install it and definitely have a look at this article, I'll
link it in the last lecture of this module
if you are stuck or if you want to dive into some specific aspect. The first requirement we will need
is NodeJS here
and we can visit this link to download NodeJS
from nodejs.org.
Now what is NodeJS and
why do we need it? NodeJS is a server-side language which uses Javascript on the server.
Now I mentioned that you use Javascript or Typescript to build your visual
but there, we will kind of use it on the client, together with HTML and CSS.
NodeJS is actually not related to the code we will write but NodeJS needs to be installed
for two reasons.
One, it has npm, Nodes Package Manager which is a great tool for handling packages you need for development,
for example the Power BI developer tools are such a package which we install through the Node Package
Manager,
it's simply a package manager which makes the installation and management of dependencies very simple.
We will later also use it to manage dependencies of our project,
for example when installing this d3 package. So npm, this package manager is one reason but we also
need NodeJS itself
because as you will learn, we can get the behavior of building our custom visual and then using the developer
tools to run a command to create a little development server which will use NodeJS in the background,
that is why we need it, to host our custom visual so that we can log into Power BI Service and get
live updating of the visual whilst we are working on it.
So that might sound a bit strange right now, we will have a look at it later but these are two reasons
we need NodeJS. So on nodejs.org,
you can either download the latest version or the latest stable question, 6.10 here. Now I will
go with the latest one
but of course feel free the other one
and once this did finish, we can walk through the installer together. I just open the file and download it
and I will now walk through the installer and it's super simple,
you can basically click through it, choose a path where you want to install it,
I'll leave it to the default path here,
make sure you install all these packages which is the default,
click next again and click install and this will now install both NodeJS
and this package manager I was talking about on your machine.
Now once this is done, it is here, we are ready to do the next step which is install the actual developer
tools or the Power BI visual tools as they are called,
this is this command here.
So for this step, we should open the command prompt and in there, you can actually see the command down
here,
we should run npm install -g for global to install this package globally on our system so that we
can access it from everywhere, from every folder and then the package name, powerbi-visuals-tools,
the name you find down here. Now you can hit enter and this will install it for you, install it in a local
repository, a global folder on your machine and add it to the path variable so that you will soon be
able to run a command, a command which is also known here,
this one to use this installed visuals or
powerbi-visuals-tools, I'll come back to this second once this is done. It is done now,
that was quick, so we can now use this command
and the easiest way of using this is to just type pbiviz which is this newly installed package, the
powerbi-visuals-tools.
If you hit enter, you should see something like this which basically just means it was successful and
which lists the commands you may actually use.
The next step is to navigate to a folder where you want to use that, so I will quickly do that.
So I navigate it to a folder where I want to create this custom visuals project and there we can use
this pbiviz command of the
powerbi-visuals-tools and then new to create a new project.
Now you can choose any name you want and I'll name it
bar chart since I want to recreate a basic bar chart
and yes, we do have bar charts in Power BI already but it is a great practice to rebuild such such a simple
visual and therefore learn how that really works.
You of course are free to
then fine tune this to your needs and change it however you want to change it. So we can now hit enter
and this will create this bar chart for us. With that, that visual is created, we can now navigate into this newly
created bar chart folder and then we can run pbiviz start.
This will now run this development server
I was referring to which is basically a little server doing one thing, exposing our chart.
Now we need someone listening to that server and getting this chart info and this someone is Power BI.
Now here's one important thing, we won't use Power BI Desktop during development,
we will use the Power BI service in the Internet because that service is able to listen to our
development server here and get the live updates of our visual.
So the next step for us is to visit app.powerbi.com and there, you should login
and once you did login, we need to enable the development mode.
We do this under the gear icon here in that settings and there, under developer,
you might want to check this box here and now once you did tick this, you're ready to view your own visual.
Now to do so, we need to have some data with which we can play around,
so let's quickly publish some data to our Power BI service.
You can find an example data file attached to this lecture,
so I'll quickly start Power BI Desktop to then import this into my Power BI Desktop file and publish it to the
service so that we can use it here and see our custom visual in action.
Therefore in Power BI Desktop, you should save this file and then once you did this, click get data from a
csv file and then it is this data.csv file which again you can find attached to this file.
Now this will import it and that automatically is all correct here, so let's hit load and
once this did loaded, let's have a look at this data, we get sales and region, that looks all right to
me,
if we have a look at our query data, let's see the types, text and a number, that's also correct,
so now we can it publish to publish it to Power BI service so that we can use it there. I'll publish it to
my workspace
and after this has been downloaded, we can go back to Power BI service to finally see this first basic custom
chart the pbiviz command already created for us.
So back in the Power BI service, here we see the bar chart dataset and in the report, here if we edit this
report, you can see this new visual here. It wasn't there before you tick the box in the settings,
this is the developer visual
and if you click this, now you see this is the visual which was created by pbiviz new.
It has this update count text and if you resize it, this number increases because there are a couple
of update events fired because on each resizing, it of course needs to update the visual but more on that
later.
This is our first visual as it was created with pbiviz new,
now let's have a look at the code which was actually created to understand what's happening there.